Artificial Life, defined as life-as-it-could-be, brings together a variety of disciplines into understanding life and possible ways to replicate it. Though artificial life is still a niche discipline, it has the possibility to change the way we see the world. The possibilities that stand out to me the most are that ALife has the potential to challenge the pure genetic and physical understanding of what makes up emotion through its ability to reveal emergent properties, redefine life through assembly theory, and serve as a catalyst for revealing the spark of what really makes us human.

When talking about emotion the recurring topic of emergence comes to mind. In Lisa Feldman Barrett’s book How Emotions Are Made, she makes the point that there is no singular part or grouping of parts of the brain responsible for each emotion. Rather it differs between each person. On top of this, she describes that emotions are “your brain's creation of what your bodily sensations mean, in relation to what is going on around you in the world” (Barrett, 30). As such, your emotions can be described as emerging from not only your internal system but the external factors that go into it, a feature that is made up by the unique relation and interaction of things rather than one simple thing. Another great quote that adds onto this is “The macrostructure of your brain is largely predetermined, but the microwiring is not” (Barrett, 34). And in this way we can understand why traditional physicists have failed to grasp the essence of life. Through pure reductionism, traditional physicists try to break down and pinpoint the exact cause of one thing, just as Dr. Barrett initially tried to do with emotion, but though that works for things like Newton's Laws of Motion it completely misses the emergence of emotion and by extension the emergence of life. This perspective ties in well with the beginning of Dr. Sara Imari Walker's book Life As No One Knows It, where she goes into depth about great physicists who dismiss life as something just made up of particles but then gives a great refute that I will hold on for some time "Physics, as we collectively understand it at this moment in history, provides a fundamental description of a universe devoid of life. It's not the universe I live in, and I bet you don't live there either" ([[Chapter 1 - What is Life Notes]]). Since a field as well-respected as physics fails to grasp life, this brings an opening for new imaginative ways of describing phenomena that make up life. While to my knowledge, a good artificial life representation of emotion hasn't been made, Ned Greene's voxel automata technique allowed for an accurate and complex simulation of life, through the growth of vines by not only their genetics (coded rules in this case) but also their relation to their environment ([[Wk 5 - Ch. 4 - Organism Growth]]). This is similar to how Barrett described how emotions are made, we can think of the "macrostructure" of Greene's voxel automata as the coded growth rules of the vines, the "microwiring" as the emergent structure of the vines, and the environment as the external factors that go into determining our "microwiring". While this correlates at a broad level of an example of being to simulate artificial life, there is still the discontinuity in that we know what complex vines should like, but not exactly what emotions should look like. As such, if we were to try and apply voxel automata to emotions directly, we wouldn't be able to confirm the result nearly as easily, since the physical structure of vines we can see but emotions differ vastly between individuals and cultures and, as Barrett pointed out, are not something you can physically pinpoint. However, voxel automata still serves as a starting point for ALife to help us understand emotions by giving us an example of accurately simulating life, the main points for research would be what additional genetic rules would needed to be coded and what needs to be added to the environment beyond just sunlight and open/closed space. Nevertheless, this is one of many possibilities that ALife has taken to simulating life, and with this, gives us one approach of finding the emergent properties of emotion and life in itself.

So what is life really? That question has been asked for a millennia and still has no answer to this day. That is why I found Sara Imari Walker's book Life As No One Knows It so interesting, especially the Chapter titled “Life is What” ([[Chapter 3 - Life is What]]). This title flips the question and asks us what is it that we can measure that is life. This brings us into assembly theory - a theory largely spearheaded by Walker that makes the astute observation that the byproducts and signs of life tend to be so combinatorially complex, or in other words unlikely, that their complexity is a sign of life in itself. Through this, we can say that life is made up of a long combination of distinct steps called an assembly path. In this assembly space, we care about the minimal path and the number of copies, which gives us two metrics to gauge life. The first, the minimum path gives us the bare number of steps it takes to create said life, while the copy number asserts it being living by it being reproducible ([[Sara I. Walker Assembly Theory]]). While this definition does give us a great way to measure something that is alive or is a byproduct of life, I am still a bit reluctant as my definition of being alive is still tied against the aspect of death and not being alive. For example, Walker hones in on LEGO a whole lot and namedrops the completed LEGO Hogwart's set as a way to illustrate this theory. As a living being myself I don't consider the LEGO set to be alive but rather a sign of life as there's no way natural causes alone could've led to LEGO Hogwart's. This in some way brings a limitation to assembly theory as it still lacks the spark that creates life as it can currently only distinguish between two groups: things as signs of life and those that aren't signs of life. This spark is something that Walker is still searching for but at least we now have a way to measure life to some capacity. With the help of Walker and assembly theory, my views on what life is are a little clearer in the way that it is not stuck to the traditional traits described in an introductory biology class but something that emerges from a complex sequence of building blocks.

With assembly theory and emotions in mind, we can now think of life as uniquely emerging from an interaction of things and steps over time. It's still a broad definition but that isn't necessarily a bad thing as life as we know it is broad in itself. This leads into several of my interests that have the ability to intersect with artificial life. I'm interested in understanding how human perspectives develop and what influences our decisions and on top of this how people are using our current knowledge of this understanding to influence us on a large scale (i.e. mass advertising, entertainment, etc.) and what aspects of that are beneficial and what can be changed to make it more beneficial for humanity as a whole. So that's a lofty goal and not necessarily related to artificial life, or so you might think. The new definition of life under assembly theory, life is what, allows us to measure how close our simulations are to life. As humans, biologically we may not be the most complex physically, however the thoughts and emotions that emerge from our brains seem to be the most agreed upon trait that distinguishes us as human, our intelligence. If we are able to continue to tweak artificial life and find the spark that Walker is still looking for it is possible that we can create a mirror to look at our species and find out what really makes us human. This tied with the already influential expansion of generative AI and the notion that "New, artificial systems can be worthy of study in their own right. They make their own facts" ([[Dorin (2014)]]) leads me to believe we can make great strides towards this goal. Whether it's simulating artificial chemistry, evolution as I experienced from recreating the Microbial Genetic Algorithm        ([[Harvey (2009)]], [[Basic Microbial Genetic Algorithm]]), or developmental systems as seen in Greene's voxel automata ([[Wk 5 - Ch. 4 - Organism Growth]]), there are a myriad of simulations we can make. If these simulations are focused on aspects that are core to human existence like emotion I am certain ALife can reveal insights into humanity. Especially, as computation gets more efficient and  and we come up with new methods to simulate life, it is only a matter of time before we create artificial life. My vision would be for ALife to create their own thoughts, their own perspectives attached to their phenotype but also their interactions with their surroundings. How does that differ from humanity? What will that teach us about humanity? And will the advent of artificial life that has equivalent or superior intellect than us cause unity among humanity in the face of an unknown threat? Or will divisiveness in class, race, gender, and other distinctions that make up our identity continue to divide us? Ultimately, through further studying artificial life I hope to gain a better encapsulation of life itself as a human.

  
  
  

Sources:

Barrett, L. F. (2017). How emotions are made: The secret life of the brain. Mariner Books.

Dorin, A. (2014). Biological bits. Monash University (Australia).

Harvey, I. (2009). The microbial genetic algorithm. Evolutionary and Adaptive Systems Group,    Centre for Computational Neuroscience and Robotics, Department of Informatics, University of Sussex, Brighton. [https://users.sussex.ac.uk/~inmanh/MicrobialGA_ECAL2009.pdf](https://users.sussex.ac.uk/~inmanh/MicrobialGA_ECAL2009.pdf)
Notes: [[csse290-alife/papers/Harvey (2009)|Harvey (2009)]]

Sinapayen, L. (2019, November 25). Introduction to artificial life for people who like AI. The Gradient. [https://thegradient.pub/an-introduction-to-artificial-life-for-people-who-like-ai/](https://thegradient.pub/an-introduction-to-artificial-life-for-people-who-like-ai/)

Walker, S. I. (2023). Life as no one knows it: The physics of life’s emergence. Riverhead Books.
Chapter 3 Life is What Notes: [[csse290-alife/books/Sara Imari Walker - Life As No One Knows It/Chapter 3 - Life is What|Chapter 3 - Life is What]]

Walker, S. I. [Arizona State University]. (2024, March 11). _Sara I. Walker: Assembly theory_. YouTube. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7NjstjYrh3A](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7NjstjYrh3A)
Notes: [[csse290-alife/videos/Sara I. Walker Assembly Theory|Sara I. Walker Assembly Theory]]

Yoder, J. (2025). Csse 290 - Artificial life course material. Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology.

  

Additional Note: Something I found really surprising is how the books you lent me before I knew the class existed (7.5 Lessons About the Brain, How Emotions Are Made, and Artificial Societies) all tie into the core material that make up artificial life to some capacity. Emergence and evolution especially for Lisa Barrett's books and then pretty much all the topics for Artificial Societies as it seems to be a social science run-through of artificial human life.